---
title: "Unique interview questions to ask interviewers"
date: 2019-03-05T12:15:09Z
draft: false
categories: ["Recruiting", "Career Counselling"]
small_images:
- "/img/onboarding-template.png"
---

<img src='/img/onboarding-template.png' style='float:right; width:150px;margin-left:15px'/>

Interviews are meant for companies and possible future employees to get to know
each other and assess if they are a _fit_. Usually _employers_ will lead
interviews and try to get a sense of how proficient a candidate is. I have [favorite programming interview
questions](/post/my-favorite-programming-interview-questions/) that I use to
achieve that goal.

I also have a set of questions that I do whenever I'm on the interviewee side.
I'll want to understand how I can add value to the company and how the company
will add value to me, as a professional. If we're to form an
[alliance](/post/alliance-framework/) we need to be mindfull of what's ahead.

<div style='clear:both'></div>
<!--more-->

It's very important to be aligned on
[values](/post/most-effective-way-values-habits/). So my questions try to cover
values and practices, but also processes and habits. I try not to ask direct
questions like: "What are your values?" - instead I try to ask open questions
and _infer_ the information from the responses.

# Culture questions

Will this be a place that I'll enjoy working at? I try to have a set of open
questions that allow me to get a sense of that.

## What's not cool about working here?

This is my all time favorite question. This simple question may tell me a lot
about the company. Usually people look far away and try to articulate what are
the _cons_ of working there. This will be a personal answer and we can tell a
lot by how it's delivered. Does the interviewer show honesty and easiness to talk
about improvement points? Even with problems being stated, do I feel
that the company provides a save environment?

Sometimes interviewers look down. Or they may say that this is the best company
and that there aren't any improvement points. These are red flags for me. I
_know_ that all workplaces have improvement points. That's part of the job and
I'm ready to help overcome those issues. But I'll feel tricked if I'm sold a
heavenly place and then I find [projects that no one wants to work
at](/post/project-no-one-wants-to-work-at/), for example.


## What makes you stay?

This is the other side of the previous question. This will also be very personal
and I need to understand that what I value may be different from what the
interviewer values. But I'm just scavenging for information and this question
tells a lot about a company. Specially when we ask it to several people. Do they
focus on camaraderie, on the hability to make an impact, on perks, on how they
have hard challenges to solve, on [working smart or working
hard](/post/work-smart-vs-work-hard/), etc.

But do you know what I'm really after in this question? Unfortunately it's not that
common but what I'd really like to hear is: the leadership. Saying: _I stay
because I'm inspired by the company's leadership and my managers_ will totally
catch my attention.

## What does it take to be successful at this company?

This may also be a question where people have their own view on the subject.
Ideally all answers would be aligned. Do we have people saying ship fast and
others saying ship perfectly? Does the company have a clear _carrer_ path and
properly sets expectations?

This is a complex question because we may have a hunch of what's needed to be
successful. We may see the senior people on the company and infer that we'd need
to be _like them_ somehow.

But [measuring success](/post/software-engineering-kpis/) is hard. If the
company has a clear way to describe what it takes to be successful, that's
great.

## How do you foster a safe environment?

Note that the question is not: _Do you have a safe environment_? That would
probably generate a straight _yes_. By asking _how_ I'll have a sense of how
conscious is the company on fostering a safe environment.

This could be natural. Maybe the leadership is great and trust occurs naturally.
If this is the case it will be hard to answer this question. Again I'd expect
people to look far ahead and try to come up with some justifications on why
there's a safe environment.

On the other hand we could have a fast and straightforward response. This will
mean that the leadership consciously makes an effort to build a safe environment
and that they foster a [set of
habits](/post/most-effective-way-values-habits/) that aim to accomplish that goal.

Red flag if the interviewer doesn't have a clue of how to answer and is not able
to actually _show_ that there's a safe environment.

# Business questions

Being aligned on the culture is very important. But I also want to know the
business _viability_ of the company. This, of course, can be very hard to
understand. But making these questions to several people (from developers to
leadership) will make me realise if there's a strong, shared vision on where the
company is heading.

## Where do you see the company in one year?

[Forecasting](/post/reactive-proactive-forecasting/) is very important. If we
don't know where we're aiming at, it will be harder to take the best road to it.
This question will allow me to get a sense of the vision of the company and If
that's something that inspires me.

By asking this question to developers I can also see if they take part in
defining the future, or if for example they just follow a backlog.

Followup question: how about in three years?

## What's your major obstacle to success?

Is it technology? Will we need to scale? Is it generating demand and awareness?
If we're not aware of our major obstacles it will be hard to overcome them.
Again each area should have a specific set of obstacles, and sometimes they
conflict with each other. Sales may say that we need to build more and be
faster, and customer success will say that we need more stability and [less bugs](/post/zero-bug-policy/).
Developers may mention tech debt and quality practices.

So how to prioritize then? Does the company provide a set of goals that allow
each team to work independently **but** aligned? Or do we have each squad rowing
in a different direction?

## How do you motivate people that _need_ to do the same for long periods of time?

This is more of a typical pitfall I usually see. There are some tasks that
companies need to take care of that may not be challenging on the long run. For
example, people that do support, or that are in a "feature factory". Doing this
for years may take the edge of us. Or maybe not, it may actually depend on how
much we like to innovate and leave our [comfort
zone](/post/comfort-zone-index/).

Having a strategy to handle these scenarios will make a difference.

## How to handle a market crash?

Maybe this one is better suited for the company's leadership. Does the company
depend a lot on a specific customer? If the main sources of income go away, how
can the company adapt and maybe pursuit other areas? How hard would it be for
the business and development to adapt and change direction?

This will show the maturity and resourcefulness of the whole company.

## What does the next iteration of awesome looks like?

If _all_ companies paid really well and had an awesome culture... What's next?
How would a company make a difference?

This one is tricky and very hard to answer. But finding a company that has a
great answer to this would be a great find indeed.

# Summary

These are a lot of questions and naturally we may need to pick the better suited
ones, specially because sometimes we don't have much more time to do them.
Asking them to several people from several roles yields great results and allows
to have a sense of how the overall company works and what they stand for.

This will allow us to gather data to make a better informed decision on if we
should join the company or not.

